window washing, grounds keeping, et cetera. And
they've shown a tremendous commitment to even
keep us, keep the planning program and the
Institute of Urban Studies. So it's both positive
and negative. It's been positive and negative for
the last five years here. And any of the negatives
that I mentioned about planning at UT Arlington,
might be able to be viewed in that context.
From another perspective, we've accomplished a
lot of interesting things in the planning program
in the dozen years. We've increased our
enrollment steadily. We're quite respectable in
our numbers now. as far as students go. We've
increased our visibility statewide in planning.
We are well looked upon, the planning program, in
the Dallas-Fort Worth area from the governments.
Whenever I meet with the city, there's interest in
what's going on. The section's proud to have us
here, APA Texas section. And generally, we're
well supported. Our graduates have some
interesting jobs. One of them works for the city of
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania housing agency.
Another one works as a regional planner for Lake
Tahoe, Reno area. One of them is planning director
of Garland, Texas. Another one's planning
director of Mansfield. They're out there. One is
with the consulting urban redevelopment firm.
And on and on. They're very practical people. They
come out of here very practical and well thought
of. The materials
have been good. the university has supported us in
computer hardware and software and in books and
supplies. There's been no lack of that. I guess
they took all our salary money and put it into that.
So I
would say that there's There has been a series of
successes. There has been a series of failures
that have occurred. And the biggest problem with
planning at UT Arlington from an academic
perspective is with four years in the School of
Architecture under an architectural dean that
had little understanding of planning, two being
moved after four years as a new program, to two
years under the graduate dean who had no other
academic programs under his tutelage on campus,
and then to be moved to the Institute of Urban
Studies. To begin again, every time it set the
planning program back as far as enrollments went,
as far as developing went. It was almost a new
ballgame each time. So in my opinion, the planning
program at UT Arlington started three times.
Good point. And there's a certain amount of just
getting used to the new territory that the faculty
would have to go through. That is correct. And of
course, then you have the nuisance of changing
your stationery all the time. That's correct.
Which is the least of your problems, I'm sure. And
in a way, we've been moved now to an academic unit
that is a troubled unit. This academic unit is not
within the budget of the university. It's a line
item of the governor's budget. It's the
Department of Urban Studies. So we are funded as a
separate tail item. So at any time we are
threatened, in some budget-cutting legislative
session. We could be gone, so we live under the gun.
Yeah, you're very vulnerable. Very vulnerable
and not a pleasant position. Whereas the other two
places, we were financially safe and sound. And
that's just my opinion. Do you think this will
change?
It's very... very much a concern to all the faculty
in the Institute of Urban Studies what the
legislature does every time it meets every two
years. Now there's a bill on the floor for them to
meet every year, which would double your anxiety.
That's correct. That's correct.
And then, of course, the institute, being a line
item, subject to a red pencil by the governor would
include the planning program. I believe so.
Well, I can only wish you well under those
conditions.
Maybe what you need is a new dean like we're getting
at Texas A&M who brings with him as part of his
agreement to become dean a very strong financial
commitment from the institution. He started out
with $3.5 million for remodeling the building,
which is only 10 years old, by the way. And we will
need to see just how much more he brings with him. He
accepted the position with the understanding
that the administration intends it to be a
first-rank college within the United States. So
we'll have to see what happens. I frankly think he
can do it, if he's given the resources that he's
been promised. I think he probably could. I wish
Arlington the same kind of good luck. Any other
points?
I think the city manager form of government is bad
for Texas. This may seem heresy. The city manager
form of government views planning as, in this
metropolitan area, they view planning as
subservient
to their office of being coordinator and they
frequently override planners'
recommendations. So as far as being an effective
form of government to create urban change for the
future, it doesn't. It's reactive to business
interests and resident interests. So it becomes
reactive as opposed to proactive. Planning must
be proactive. There is an institutional conflict
there between planning and city manager form of
government. You'd rather see a strong mayor type?
Yes, indeed. Yes, indeed. That's what El Paso has,
and it has worked quite well there, because what
that has done, in the case of John Cunningham, was
to put him in the position of being a de facto city
manager, as well as planning director. Now, under
I don't mean even... And as to Valencia, we'll have
to see what role planning has to play under a new
personality.
Well, I think that the result of planning history,
the result of any kind of planning history, is
where is it now, where has it been in relation to
that. I think planning has had its difficulty in
non-traditions due to the structure of
government. That an effective business manager,
that is a city manager,
is bottom line results dollar oriented. Short
term. Which means short term. Immediate. Right.
And that is not long term. And they run out of
patience with people who think in long range
terms. Because they have short term deadlines to
make. So planning in north central Texas, I think
the great future is an environmental movement,
environmental planning. Because the pressure
can be brought to bear to force planning to occur or
people will die. Or there'll be no place for the
garbage. Right.
Thank you very much, Joel. I appreciate it.
Bye.
I guess that could work.
Just love your Lord.